Added usage docs (#56)
populationgenomics/cpg-flow: README.md

## 📋 Table of Contents

1. 🐙 [What is this API ?](#what-is-this-api)

> 2. . ✨ [Production and development links](#production-and-development-links)

Reviewer: Typo?

Author: Yes! Fixed, TY

### 🛠️ Development

To setup for development we recommend using the makefile setup

```bash

> make init-dev

Author: Fixed!

```

As this installs the pre-commit hooks for you. To install the local cpg-flow run

```bash

> make install-local

Author: Fixed!

make install-build
```

## <a name="usage">🤖 Usage</a>

> This project provides the batteries and utilities needed to run your pipelines, but does not offer hosting the logic of any pipelines themselves. This approach offers the benefit of making all components more modular, manageable and decoupled. The pipelines logic would be hosted in a separate repository.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This project provides the framework to construct pipelines but does not offer hosting the logic of any pipelines themselves. This approach offers the benefit of making all components more modular, manageable and decoupled. Pipelines themselves are hosted in a separate repository.

```

> For demonstration, the [`test_workflows_shared` repository](https://github.com/populationgenomics/test_workflows_shared) serves as a template for a good pipeline, and contains a collection of stages and jobs that constructs a Prime Pyramid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [test_workflows_shared repository](https://github.com/populationgenomics/test_workflows_shared) acts as a template and demonstrates how to structure a pipeline using CPG Flow.
```

> For a pipeline to successfully execute, there a few required components:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The components required to build pipelines with CPG Flow: 
```

### `config.toml` file

This file contains the configuration settings to your pipeline. This file allows the pipeline developer to define settings such as:

1. what stages will be run or skipped
2. what dataset to use
3. what access level to use
4. any input cohorts
5. sequencing type

> 

Reviewer 2: Here we could also include an explanation about 
[workflow] and other categories. 

Also we could include a note to explain the interaction between this and the analysis runner (i.e. theyre combined)

Author: Done

```toml
[workflow]

> dataset = 'fewgenomes'
> 
> # Note: for fewgenomes and sandbox mentioning datasets by name is not a security risk
> # DO NOT DO THIS FOR OTHER DATASETS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dataset = 'fewgenomes'

# Note: for fewgenomes and sandbox mentioning datasets by name is not a security risk
# DO NOT DO THIS FOR OTHER DATASETS
```

Perhaps its better to just not include this example here? Decrease the risk of someone accidentally using a config option that they ought not to use if we don't use it in the docs.

Author: I thought about that, but removing it then leaves room for error if someone does not realise we are NOT supposed to be naming datasets. Happy to remove if you still feel like that is the better option here!

input_cohorts = ['COH2142']
access_level = 'test'

# Force stage rerun
force_stages = [
    'GeneratePrimes',
    'CumulativeCalc',
    'FilterEvens',
    'BuildAPrimePyramid',

> ]

Author: Done

status_reporter = 'metamist'
...
```

### `main.py` or equivalent entrypoint for the pipeline

This file would store the workflow definition as a list of stages, and then run said workflow:

```python
 import os
 from pathlib import Path
 from cpg_flow.workflow import run_workflow
 from cpg_utils.config import set_config_paths
 from stages import BuildAPrimePyramid, CumulativeCalc, FilterEvens, GeneratePrimes

 CONFIG_FILE = str(Path(__file__).parent / 'config.toml')

 def run_cpg_flow(dry_run=False):

    # See the 'Key Considerations and Limitations' section for this definition below:
     workflow = [GeneratePrimes, CumulativeCalc, FilterEvens, BuildAPrimePyramid]

     config_paths = os.environ['CPG_CONFIG_PATH'].split(',')

     # Inserting after the "defaults" config, but before user configs:
     set_config_paths(config_paths[:1] + [CONFIG_FILE] + config_paths[1:])
     run_workflow(stages=workflow, dry_run=dry_run)

 if __name__ == '__main__':
   run_cpg_flow()
```

>   The workflow definition here forms a DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) structure.

Reviewer 2: It might be useful to include a picture of the DAG here as generated by the new print dag feature. You can also include a note on how to get the DAG to show.

Reviewer 2: We can also link to the no forward discovery note here.

Author: Done

> ### `stages.py` or equivalent file for the `Stage` definitions

Author: Don't think this is a problem, pipeline developer should be able to make their judgement based on the length of their stage definitions, but I'll include a note on following this as best practice for lengthy definitions :)

> A `Stage` represents a node in the DAG. The stages can be abstracted from either a `CohortStage`, `MultiCohortStage`, or a `SequencingGroupStage`.

Author: Done

> The stage definition should use the `@stage` decorator to set what stages to depend on, set analysis keys and the analysis type. All stages require an `expected_outputs` class method definition, that sets the expected output path location for a given `Target` such as a `SequencingGroup`, `Cohort`, or `MultiCohort`.

Author: Done

  workflow.py
```

If the job is successfully created, the analysis-runner output will include a job URL. This driver job will trigger additional jobs, which can be monitored via the `/batches` page on Hail. Monitoring these jobs helps verify that the workflow ran successfully. When all expected jobs complete without errors, this confirms the successful execution of the workflow and indicates that the `cpg_flow` package is functioning as intended.

See the [Docker](#docker) section for instruction on pulling valid images releases.

## <a name="key-considerations-and-limitations">😵‍💫 Key Considerations and Limitations</a>

**No Forward Discovery:** The framework exclusively relies on backward traversal. If a stage is not explicitly or indirectly linked to one of the final stages through the `required_stages` parameter of the `@stage` decorator, it will not be included in the workflow. In other words, stages that are not reachable from a final stage are effectively ignored. This backward discovery approach ensures that only the stages directly required for the specified final stages are included, optimizing the workflow by excluding irrelevant or unused stages.

> **Workflow Definition:** The workflow definition serves as a lookup table for the final stages. If a final stage is not listed in this definition, it will not be part of the workflow, as there is no mechanism for forward discovery to identify it.

Reviewer 2: I think it might be good to move this to the workflow.py section in usage.

Author: We don't have a `workflow.py` section but I assume you mean the `stages.py` and `main.py` sections :)

The [test_workflows_shared repository](https://github.com/populationgenomics/test_workflows_shared) acts as a template and demonstrates how to structure a pipeline using CPG Flow.

The components required to build pipelines with CPG Flow:

### config `.toml` file

This file contains the configuration settings to your pipeline. This file allows the pipeline developer to define settings such as:

1. what stages will be run or skipped
2. what dataset to use
3. what access level to use
4. any input cohorts
5. sequencing type

```toml
[workflow]
dataset = 'fewgenomes'

# Note: for fewgenomes and sandbox mentioning datasets by name is not a security risk
# DO NOT DO THIS FOR OTHER DATASETS

input_cohorts = ['COH2142']
access_level = 'test'

# Force stage rerun
force_stages = [
    'GeneratePrimes', # the first stage
    'CumulativeCalc', # the second stage
    'FilterEvens', # the third stage
    'BuildAPrimePyramid', # the last stage
]

> show_workflow = True # generates a plot of the DAG
> ...

Reviewer: Remove the error highlighting:

```suggestion
show_workflow = true # generates a plot of the DAG
# ...
```

Author: Fixed!

```python
workflow = [GeneratePrimes, CumulativeCalc, FilterEvens, BuildAPrimePyramid]
```

### Config Settings for `expected_outputs`

The `expected_outputs` method is called for every stage in the workflow, even if the `config.toml` configures the stage to be skipped. This ensures that the workflow can validate or reference the expected outputs of all stages.

Since this method may depend on workflow-specific configuration settings, these settings must be present in the workflow configuration, regardless of whether the stage will run. To avoid issues, it is common practice to include dummy values for such settings in the default configuration. This is not the intended behaviour and is marked as an area of improvement in a future release.

### Verifying results of `expected_outputs`

The API uses the results of the `expected_outputs` method to determine whether a stage needs to run. A stage is scheduled for execution only if one or more Path objects returned by `expected_outputs` do not exist in Google Cloud Platform (GCP). If a returned Path object exists, the stage is considered to have already run successfully, and is therefore skipped.

> For outputs such as Matrix Tables (.mt), Hail Tables (.ht), or Variant Datasets (.vds), which are complex structures of thousands of files, the check is performed on the `object/_SUCCESS` file to verify that the output was written completely. However, it has been observed that the `object/_SUCCESS` file may be written multiple times during processing, contrary to the expectation that it should only be written once after all associated files have been fully processed.

Reviewer: What are the implications of this? Is it common? Is there something I'm supposed to do about detecting it?

Author: Great question, apparently it's not too big an issue because the attributes we get and store are trivial for such complex structures. See: https://github.com/populationgenomics/production-pipelines/pull/1108

### `String` outputs from `expected_outputs`

> String outputs from the `expected_outputs` method are not checked by the API. This is because string outputs cannot reliably be assumed to represent valid file paths and may instead correspond to other forms of outputs.

Reviewer: What is the advice about what I ought to be returning from `expected_outputs()`? I think in the past all the items I've been returning have been strings… Should stages be returning file paths as `Path` instead… usually / always?

Author: ooo great question, I'm actually not sure because it seems like you can define your return type, leaving room for ambiguity. @violetbrina @vivbak thoughts?

Reviewer 2: Yes file path should be encouraged

...
# This stage depends on the `GeneratePrimes` stage, and requires outputs from that stage.
@stage(required_stages=[GeneratePrimes], analysis_keys=['cumulative'], analysis_type='custom')
class CumulativeCalc(SequencingGroupStage):
 def expected_outputs(self, sequencing_group: SequencingGroup):
     return {
         'cumulative': sequencing_group.dataset.prefix() / WORKFLOW_FOLDER / f'{sequencing_group.id}_cumulative.txt',
     }

 def queue_jobs(self, sequencing_group: SequencingGroup, inputs: StageInput) -> StageOutput | None:
     input_txt = inputs.as_path(sequencing_group, GeneratePrimes, 'primes')
     b = get_batch()

     cumulative_calc_output_path = str(self.expected_outputs(sequencing_group).get('cumulative', ''))

     # We define a job instance from the `cumulative_calc` job definition.
     job_cumulative_calc = cumulative_calc(b, sequencing_group, input_txt, cumulative_calc_output_path)

     jobs = [job_cumulative_calc]

     return self.make_outputs(
         sequencing_group,
         data=self.expected_outputs(sequencing_group),
         jobs=jobs,
     )
...
```

There is a key consideration to take into account when writing the stages:

>   **No Forward Discovery:** The framework exclusively relies on backward traversal. If a stage is not explicitly or indirectly linked to one of the final stages through the `required_stages` parameter of the `@stage` decorator, it will not be included in the workflow. In other words, stages that are not reachable from a final stage are effectively ignored. This backward discovery approach ensures that only the stages directly required for the specified final stages are included, optimizing the workflow by excluding irrelevant or unused stages.

Reviewer 3: This is duplicated paragraph from above (main.py section) should we have just link to it, instead of copy?

Author: Fixed!

Therefore, the pipeline code needs to be pushed to a remote version control system, for `analysis-runner` to be able to pull it for execution. A job can then be submitted:

```shell
analysis-runner \
  --image "australia-southeast1-docker.pkg.dev/cpg-common/images/cpg_flow:1.0.0" \
  --dataset "fewgenomes" \
  --description "cpg-flow_test" \
  --access-level "test" \
  --output-dir "cpg-flow_test" \
  --config "<YOUR_CONFIG>.toml" \
  workflow.py
```

If the job is successfully created, the analysis-runner output will include a job URL. This driver job will trigger additional jobs, which can be monitored via the `/batches` page on Hail. Monitoring these jobs helps verify that the workflow ran successfully. When all expected jobs complete without errors, this confirms the successful execution of the workflow and indicates that the `cpg_flow` package is functioning as intended.

> > To generate a plot of the DAG, `show_workflow = True` should be included in the config. The DAG plot generated from the pipeline definition is available in the logs via the job URL. To find the link to the plot, search the *Logs* section for the string: "**INFO - Link to the graph:**".

Reviewer 3: Again copy of section from main.py, wonder if link to it would be better.

Author: Fixed!

**`String` outputs from `expected_outputs`:**

String outputs from the `expected_outputs` method are not checked by the API. This is because string outputs cannot reliably be assumed to represent valid file paths and may instead correspond to other forms of outputs.

**Behavior of `queue_jobs` in relation to `expected_outputs`:**

When the `expected_outputs` check determines that one or more required files do not exist, and the stage is not configured to be skipped, the `queue_jobs` method is invoked to define the specific work that needs to be scheduled in the workflow.

The `queue_jobs` method runs within the driver image, before any jobs in the workflow are executed. Because of this, it cannot access or read files generated by earlier stages, as those outputs have not yet been created. The actual outputs from earlier jobs only become available as the jobs are executed during runtime.

**Explicit dependency between all jobs from `queue_jobs`:**

> When the `queue_jobs` method schedules a collection of jobs to Hail Batch, one or more jobs are returned from the method, and the framework sets an explicit dependency between *these* jobs, and all jobs from the `Stages` set in the `required_stages` parameter. Therefore, all jobs that run in a Stage, must be returned within `queue_jobs`, to ensure no jobs start out of sequence. As an example:

Reviewer 4: tiny nitpick, but most if not all of the commas in this sentence aren't needed

"Therefore, all jobs that run in a Stage, must be returned within `queue_jobs`, to ensure no jobs start out of sequence."

Author: Good point, fixed!
